---
Course: ENGENVI
Topic: Solid Environment
Linked_Tests:
  - Quiz 2
  - Final Exam
Status: Done
References used:
  - Student Presentation Materials
tags:
  - lesson
---

- Solid waste
	- Sources
		- Residential waste (household)
			- Residential waste pertains to the waste generated at home.
			- It is the most well known source of waste.
		- Industrial waste
			- Industrial waste consists of materials discarded during industrial activities, such as manufacturing, processing, and mining.
			- It can include chemical, hazardous, and non-hazardous materials (e.g., scrap metal, solvents, and waste from food processing).
		- Commercial waste
			- Commercial waste originates from establishments engaged in business activities, like retail stores, offices, and restaurants.
			- It encompasses a wide range of waste products, including paper, packaging materials, food scraps, and electronic waste. It is similar to municipal waste but generated by businesses.
		- Institutional waste
			- Institutional waste is generated by facilities like schools, hospitals, government buildings, and prisons.
			- It includes paper, plastics, food waste, and medical waste.
		- Construction and demolition waste
			- Construction and demolition waste is produced from the construction, renovation, and demolition of buildings, roads, and bridges.
			- It includes materials such as concrete, wood, asphalt, metals, bricks, and glass. Moreover, it can contain hazardous materials like glass and sheet metal; it can also contain inert waste such as bricks and cement.
		- Municipal waste
			- Municpial waste is also known as solid waste.
			- It consists of household waste, commercial waste, and waste from public services that are collected and treated by or for municipalities.
			- It includes a variety of materials, such as food scraps, paper, cardboard, plastics, textiles, and yard waste.
		- Agricultural waste
			- Agricultural waste is generated from farming activities. It includes crop residues, animal manure, and other organic materials discarded during agricultural production processeses.
			- It can be a valuable resource for [[composting]] and bioenergy production.
			- It is mostly biodegradable.
	- Classification
		- [[biodegradable waste|Biodegradable waste]]
			- Biodegradable waste refers to any organic material that can be broken down by microorganisms into simpler substances for the environment.
			- This includes, food waste, garden waste, paper, and certain types of agricultural residues.
			- It is a valuable resource for [[composting]] and bioenergy production.
		- [[non-biodegradable waste|Non-biodegradable waste]]
			- Non-biodegradable waste consists of materials that cannot be easily broken down through natural processes.
			- This includes many types of metals, glass, and certain synthetic materials.
			- Due to their persistence in the environment, they can accumulate and pose long-term pollution challenges. Managing them often involve recycling, [[incineration]], and landfilling.
		- [[recyclable waste|Recyclable waste]]
			- Recyclable waste encompasses materials that can be collected, processed, and transformed into new products.
			- It commonly includes paper, cardboard, glass, metals, and certain plastics.
		- [[inert waste|Inert waste]]
			- Inert waste is characterized by its attribute of not undergoing any significant physical, chemical, or biological transformations once disposed of. For this reason, it does not decompose or release pollutants into the environment.
			- Examples include construction and demolition materials.
			- While it is relatively harmless, it still requires proper disposal to avoid unnecessary use of landfill space.
		- [[hazardous waste|Hazardous waste]]
			- Hazardous waste poses significant threats to public health or the environment because it includes waste materials that are toxic, corrosive, flammable, reactive, or contain infectious properties. As a result, it requires special handling, treatment, and disposal methods to mitigate its harmful effects.
			- Common sources include industrial processes, medical facilities, and household hazardous waste (e.g., batteries, paint, and chemicals).
	- Composition
		- [[organic waste|Organic waste]]
			- Organic waste comprises waste materials that are biological in origin, including food scraps, garden waste, and wood.
			- This type of waste is biodegradable and can be processed into compost or biogas through methods like [[composting]] or anaerobic digestion.
		- Paper and cardboard
			- These materials are recyclable and can be reprocessed into new paper products.
			- Paper and cardboard waste includes newspapers, magazines, office paper, packaging materials, and cardboard boxes.
		- Plastics
			- Plastic waste encompasses a wide range of synthetic or semi-synthetic materials, including packaging, bottles, bags, and other consumer products.
			- Plastics can be categorized as [[polyethylene terephthalate]] (PET), [[high-density polyethylene]] (HDPE), and [[polyvinyl chloride]] (PVC).
				- PET and HDPE are commonly and easily recycled.
				- PVC, on the other hand, is difficult to recycle due to the presence of chlorine and other chemicals.
		- Glass
			- Glass waste is recyclable and can be melted down and reformed into new glass products indefinitely without losing purity or quality.
			- It includes bottles, jars, and other glass products.
		- Metals
			- Metal waste consists of ferrous metals (iron and steel) and non-ferrous metals (aluminum, copper, and brass).
			- They are valuable materials that can be recycled repeatedly without degrading.
		- Textiles
			- Textile waste includes discarded clothing, fabrics, and other textile materials.
			- It can originate from household, commercial, or industrial sources.
			- It is difficult to recycle due to the variety of materials and dyes used.
		- E-waste ([[electronic waste]])
			- E-waste refers to discarded electronic devices and equipment, such as computers, smartphones, TVs, and appliances.
			- Proper recycling of e-waste can recover valuable materials (e.g., metals) and prevent environmental pollution from hazardous substances.
	- Waste management
		- Functional components
			- Waste generation
				- The creation of waste through consumption, production, and disposal activities.
			- Waste storage
				- The temporary containment of waste to prevent pollution and facilitate collection.
			- Waste collection
				- The gathering of waste to transfer.
			- Transfer and transport
				- The transportation of gathered waste to treatment or disposal facilities.
			- Treatment and processing
				- The conversion or reduction of waste volume or waste toxicity using methods like [[composting]] and [[incineration]].
				- Examples
					- Segregation of different types of waste materials.
					- Applying the reduce, reuse, and recycle process.
					- Establishment of [[Materials Recovery Facilities]] (MRFs)
			- Disposal
				- The final stage in which the rest of the residual waste are disposed of in landfill sites or other designated facilities.
		- Types of waste collection
			- Residue collection
				- The most common method in urban areas.
				- Municipal or contracted waste collectors pick up segregated waste from designated collection points on scheduled days.
			- Drop-off centers
				- Some local government units (LGUs) provide drop-off centers or [[materials recovery facilities]] (MRFs) where residents can bring their segregated waste, particularly for recyclables and hazardous waste.
				- These centers facilitate the proper disposal and recycling of materials that require special handling.
			- Community-based collection
				- Some barangays implement community-based waste collection efforts, which can include clean-up events, setting up of local [[Materials Recovery Facilities|MRFs]], and education campaigns on waste segregation and reduction.
			- Private sector involvement
				- The private sector plays an important role in waste collection and management, especially in commercial and industrial areas.
				- Private waste management companies offer services ranging from regular waste pickup to specialized handling of hazardous or industrial waste.
		- Waste minimization, reuse, and recycling
			- Waste minimization
				1. Prioritizing the most impactful
					- This principle aims to prevent waste generation at the source itself. It involves the following:
						- Buying less and opting for durable and multipurpose products.
						- Borrowing or renting instead of buying individual items.
						- Choosing products with minimal packaging
							- Opt for bulk purchases or refillable options.
						- [[Composting]] food scraps
							- This reduces landfill waste and creates a nutrient-rich soil for gardens.
				2. Reuse
					- Extending the life of existing items. Before discarding anything, consider the following:
						- Repair broken items instead of replacing them.
						- Repurpose old items.
						- Donate unwanted items in good condition.
						- Sell usable items through online platforms or garage sales.
				3. Recycling
					- Recycle properly by familiarizing yourself with local recycling program’s guidelines.
					- Properly clean and sort recyclables according to local instructions.
					- Choose products made with recycled content to incentivize sustainable practices.
			- Importance for sustainability
				- Resource conservation
					- The lesser the need for extracting virgin resources like timber and metals, the more natural ecosystems are preserved.
				- Reduced environmental impact
					- Landfills contribute to greenhouse gas emissions and leach harmful pollutants.
				- Energy savings
					- Recycling often requires less energy than producing new materials from scratch.
				- Economic benefits
					- Recycling creates jobs in the collection, sorting, and processing of recyclables.
		- [[RA 9003]]
			- Also known as the *Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000*.
			- Waste avoidance and volume reduction
				- Focuses in reducing waste through
					- the promotion of durable, repairable, and recyclable products.
					- advocating for minimal waste generation from consumers.
				- Goals
					- Lessen the environmental impact of waste.
					- Reduce the demand on waste management systems.
					- Conserve resources by avoiding waste wherever possible.
			- Segregation of waste at source
				- This policy mandates the separation of waste materials into distinct categories:
					- biodegradable
					- non-biodegradable
					- recyclable
					- special or hazardous waste
				- It aims to facilitate efficient collection, recycling, and disposal.
				- It is crucial for maximizing recovery of resources, improving recycling rates, and reducing potential [[incineration]] or landfill waste.
			- Establishment of [[Materials Recovery Facilities]] (MRFs)
				- MRFs are tasked to sort, clean, and process collected recyclable materials for recycling or [[composting]].
				- It reduces waste sent to landfills, supports local recycling industries, and contributes to resource recovery.
			- Collection and transport of solid waste
				- This policy outlines the efficient collection and transport of waste from source to disposal facilities, recycling, centers, or MRFs.
				- It requires coordination between local government units, waste collectors, and the community.
			- Recycling and resource recovery
				- This policy promotes recycling and reduces the reliance on landfill disposal.
				- It encompasses activities such as
					- material recycling
					- [[composting]] of organic waste
					- conversion of waste to energy
				- It also supports the development of markets for recycled products and encourages innovation in recycling technologies and practices.
			- Regulated use of plastic bags
				- This policy regulates the use of plastic bags and encourages the reduction of single-use plastic bags by promoting environmentally-friendly alternatives.
				- Regulations may include
					- imposing fees for plastic bag use
					- encouraging retailers to offer reusable bags
					- sometimes implementing plastic bag bans
			- Establishment of [[Solid Waste Management Board]]
				- The Solid Waste Management Board is established at the national, provincial, city, and municipal levels to oversee the implementation of solid waste management plans and programs. They will be responsible for ensuring compliance with 9003.
				- The board includes representatives from various sectors, including
					- the government
					- NGOs
					- the recycling industry
					- the community
			- Penalties for violations
				- The penalties include the following (depending on the severity):
					- fines
					- community service
					- imprisonment
- [[Materials Recovery Facilities]] (MRF)
	- An MRF is a plant designed to receive, separate, and prepare recyclable materials for marketing to end-user manufacturers.
	- Types
		- Clean MRF
			- Clean MRFs utilize mechanical and manual methods to sort and prepare recyclable materials.
			- They sort **source-separated** recyclabes, with a focus on ensuring quality and quantity.
			- Steps
				1. The recyclable materials are taken to clean MRFs through a [[bag breaker]], a machinery that opens bags and enhances the separation of materials.
				2. The incoming material passes through a [[Trommel screen]], separating the large lighter mixed paper and cardboard fractions from other materials.
				3. It then passes through a [[ballistic separator]], where the materials are further segregated based on their dimensions and weight.
				4. Afterwards, it passes through a [[magnetic separator]], extracting steel cans and other ferrous metals.
				5. The [[air knife]] or [[air separator]] may be used to extract contamination from the glass fraction.
				6. Non-ferrous metals are then separated using the [[Eddy current separator]].
				7. [[Near-Infrared|NIR]] and [[optical sorting]] is applied, which will have an analysis of materials passing through the sorting line, exact recognition, and sorting of a number of different types of plastics based on their polymer composition.
		- Dirty MRF
			- Dirty MRFs **extract recyclable materials from mixed waste** through the use of mechanical sorting equipment and manual labor.
			- The quantity and quality of materials recovered are decreased, when compared to Clean MRFs, due to the materials being more contaminated.
	- Technology innovations
		- [[optical sorting|Optical sorting]]
			- Utilizes sensors to discern material properties based on its optical characteristics, and then separates through their air jets.
		- [[artificial intelligence|Artificial intelligence]] (AI) and [[robotics]]
			- Robots, supported by AI, are capable of sorting recyclables more accurately and at a higher rate (when compared to human sorters).
		- [[Near-Infrared]] (NIR) Technology
			- Seems to make identification possible on various types of plastics to be more precise with sorting.
- [[Composting]]
	- Decomposting waste into nutrient-rich compost, for a healthier soil and reduction of waste volume to dispose of, requires management of temperature, moisture, and carbon-to-nitrogen ratio.
	- Advantages
		- Organic waste diversion
			- There would be less landfill waste and associated emissions.
		- Soil enrichment
		- Nutrient recycling
			- The return of essential nutrients to the soil.
		- Erosion control
			- It helps retain soil, preventing soil erosion.
		- Waste reduction
			- Reduction of waste volume and transportation cost.
	- Disadvantages
		- Time and space requirements
		- Odor and pest concerns
			- Lack of proper management gives rise to foul odor and pests.
		- Quality variability
			- Compost quality may be inconsistent depending on the circumstance.
		- Pathogen and weed survival
			- Improper management can result in their survival.
- [[Incineration]]
	- Incineration involves using an incinerator to burn hazardous materials so that contaminants are destroyed.
	- The materials are heated in the incinerator’s combustion chamber, usually with added oxygen. Moreover, heating times vary based on waste type.
	- Any remaining gases pass through a secondary chamber for further treatment, including removal of particulate matter and acid gases.
	- It can treat the following:
		- soil
		- sludge
		- liquids
		- gases
- [[pyrolysis|Pyrolysis]]
	- Pyrolysis is the decomposition of waste into gas and solid phases without external oxygen (typically around 500-600 $^{\circ}C$).
	- It is increasingly used for waste plastic management, generating valuable resources like fuel oil, carbon black, and combustible gas.
	- The products can either be refined further or used as heating fuel.
	- Benefits
		- Reduces reliance on fossil fuels.
		- Conserves resources.
		- Offers an eco-friendly waste management solution.
- [[sanitary landfill|Sanitary landfill]]
	- Sanitary landiflls efficiently manages solid waste by confining it in a designated area, lined to prevent leakage.
	- Waste is compressed, with drainage systems for liquids and collection of methane gas to prevent explosion.
	- Daily waste is covered with layers of clay and topsoil to prevent odor and pest issues.
	- Stormwater pipes are installed to manage runoff.