---
Course: SOFDESG
Topic: Documentation
Linked_Tests:
  - Quiz 3
Status: Planned
References used:
  - SOFWENG Lecture 9 (Lecture Slides)
tags:
  - lesson
---

- Documentation
	- Describes an information system and helps the users, managers, and IT staff who must interact with it.
	- TODO
	- Program documentation
		- Describes the inputs, outputs, and processing logic for all the program modules.
		- The program documentation process starts in the system analysis phase and continue during implementation.
		- TODO
	- System documentation
		- Describes the system’s functions and how they are implemented.
		- Includes data dictionary entries, data flow diagrams, object models, screen layouts, source documents, and the systems request that initiated the project.
		- TODO
	- Operation documentation
		- Operations documentation contains all the information needed for processing and describing online and printed output.
		- Includes the following information:
			- Program system analyst, programmer, and system identification.
			- Scheduling information for printed output, such as report run frequency and deadlines.
			- Input files and where they originate, and out files and destination.
			- E-mail and report distribution lists.
			- TODO
	- User documentation
		- User documentation, written or other visual information consists of instructions and information to users who will interact with the system. It includes user manuals, help screens, and tutorials.
		- Programmer or systems analysts usually create programs and system documentation.
		- You need someone with expert skills in the area doing the development, just as you need someone with expert skills developing the software.
- Management approval
	- After system testing is complete, you present the results to management.
	- You must provide detailed time schedule, cost estimate, and staffing requirements for making the system fully operational.
	- TODO
- Training
	- A successful information system requires training for users, managers, and IT staff members.
	- The entire systems development effort can depend on whether or not people understand the system and know how to use it effectively.
- Vendor training
	- If the system includes the purchase of software or hardware, then vendor-supplied training is one of the features you should investigate in the RFPs (requests for proposal) and RFQs (requests for quotation) that you sent to potential vendors.
	- The training is usually is conducted as the vendor’s site.
	- TODO
- Outside training resources
	- If you have standardized or customized package, and vendor training is not practical and your organization does not have the internal resources to perform the training, outside training consultants might be a desirable alternative.
	- TODO
- In-house training
	- The IT staff and user-departments often share responsibility for developing and conducting training programs.
	- TODO
- System changeover
	- System changeover is the process of putting the new information system online and retiring the old system.
	- The four changeover methods are direct cutover, parallel operation, pilot opeartion, and phased operation.
	- Direct cutover
		- a direct approach where old system is cut and overwrite by new system. The direct cutover approach causes the changeover from the old system to the new system to occur immediately when the new system becomes operational.
		- Involves more risk than other changeover methods, because some difficulties can arise when the system goes into operation.
	- Parallel cutover
		- The parallel operation changeover method requires that both the old and the new information systems operate fully for a specified period.
		- Data is input into both systems and output generated by the new system is compared with the equivalent output from the old system.
	- Pilot operation
		- The pilot operation changeover method involves implementing the complete new system at a selected location of the company.
		- TODO
	- Phased operation
		- Phased operation works in different phases or stages. Implementaiton of new system in modules or stages in phased opeartion. THis is also a combination of direct cutover and parallel similiar to pilot operation. But in this approach the entire system is provided to some users and instead a part of system to all users.
- Post implementation task
	- A post-implementation evaluation assesses the overall quality of the information system.
	- The evaluation verifies that the new system meets specified requirements complies with user objectives, and achieves the anticipated benefits.
	- TODO
- Final report management
	- Your report should include the following
		- A comparison of actual costs and schedules to the original estimates.
		- Post-implementation evaluation, if it has been performed.
	- TODO